Linux/Admin 1/Readme.md, before:

# Commands I've Learnt:
**I will write the new commands for me because most of these commands I've studied from another sources.**
## Day 1: Basic Commands

- **ls**: List files and dir.
```bash
$ ls -R # list all files and Dirs and thier sub-directories RECURSIVELY.
```

- **head & tail**: Print the first and last lines of a file.
```bash
$ head -3 file1.txt # print the first 3 lines.
$ tail -2 file1.txt # print the last two lines.
```

- **cp**: Copy files and dir.
```bash
$ cp -i file1.txt dir1/file1.txt # asks before overwrite the file.
```

## Day 2: Users and Groups
### 1. Users:
- The **/etc/passwd** file includes these fields: <br>
Login name | Encrypted password | User Id (uid) | Group Id (gid) | Comment about the user | Home Directory | Login bash.

- The **/etc/shadow** file: Have all passwords encrypted -probably- with SHA 256 

- **useradd**: Add new users.
```bash
$ useradd username # add new user named username
$ useradd -u 1003 -g 1003 -c “this is a comment from this testuser” -md /home/testuser -s /bin/bash testuser # here we specify some details about the user.
```

- **userdel**: Delete a user account
```bash
$ userdel -rf testuser # delete testuser account and home directory and mail spool with force of removing files.
```

- **usermod**: Change all properties of a user like adding user to group, **BUT for changing password**, it's not good.
```bash
$ usermod -l test11@user testuser # this will change the username from testuser to test11@user.
$ usermod -L testuser # this will lock the account of testuser (can't login).
$ usermod -a -G newgroup testuser # this will add testuser to newgroup.
```

- **passwd**: Change a password for a user.
```bash
$ passwd testuser # it made you enter a new password
$ sudo passwd -d testuser # delete password of testuser account
```

- **chage**: Change password expiry information.
```bash
$ chage -m 20 testuser # Change the min number of days between password changes to 20 days.
$ chage -M 20 testuser # Change the max number of days between password changes to 20 days.
```

### 2. Groups:

- **groupadd**: Create new group
```bash
$ groupadd newgroup # adds nwegroup group :)
```

- **groupmod**: Modify group properties like name and ID.
```bash
$ groupmod -n new_group old_group # Renames the old_group TO new_group.
```

- **chown**: change group and/or user ownership of a file or directory.
```bash
$ chown :newgroup file1 # Change owenership of file1 from its old group TO newgroup.
$ chown -R user2:newgroup dir1 # Change dir1 owenership from its old group TO newgroup and from old user TO user2.
```

- **groupmems**: See which users are a member of a certin group.
```bash
$ groupmems -g group1 -l # List all users within group1.
```

- **poweroff**: Turns the machine off
```bash
$ poweroff
$ shutdown -h 18:20 # Schedule shutdown at 6:20 A.M. 
$ init 0
```


## Day 3: Vi Editor & Environment Variables:
### 1. Vi Editor:

- **view**: view a file in read-only mode:
```bash
$ view file1 # Opens file1 in read-only mode. Press :q to quit
```

- **:n**: goes to the nth row.
- **ctrl+f**: goes forward one page.
- **ctrl+b**: goes backward one page.<br><br>

- **yy then p**: copy and paste.
- **:n,n co n**: copy lines n though n and puts them after Line n.<br><br>


- **x**: delete one letter.
- **dd**: delete one line.
- **D**: delete one line from the cursor to the right end of the line.
- **:3,7d**: delete from line 3 to 7.<br><br>

- **/string**: Searches for this string in the file.
- **n**: When pressing n it searches for the next occurrence of the string.
- **N**: When pressing N it searches for the previous occurrence of the string.
- **:%s/old/new/g**: Searches for the old string and replaces it with the new string globally.
- **:set nu**: show lines numbers.

### 2. Environment Variables:
- **env**: it display all environment variables.
- **$PATH**: A colon-separated list of directories used by the shell to look for executable program names.
- **alias**: make your own commands shortcut.
```bash
$ alias list='ls -l' # this will make list same as ls -l command.
$ unalias list # it removes list command and you can use ls -l normally.
```

## Day 4: Processes, I/O Management, Search in Files:
### 1. Processes:

- **ps**: list running prcess in foreground.
```bash
$ ps -a # display all process attached to the terminal even with different tabs.
$ ps -f # display all information about process.
```

- **jobs**: list running jobs.
```bash
$ sleep 100 & # delay for 100 seconds and run it in the background.
$ jobs # list all jobs, Outputs [1]+ Running.
$ fg 1 # move job no.1 from background to foreground.
$ ctrl+z # stop the running command (sleep in the foreground).
$ bg 1 # move the running command (sleep) to the background again.

$ kill -19 %1 # SigStop sleep command.
$ kill %1 # SigTerm sleep command.
$ jobs # list that it's terminated and then it's gone.
```

- **nice**: start a process with adjusted priority.
A negative nice value means higher priority, whereas a positive nice value means lower priority.<br>
Zero in this field simply means priority will not be adjusted in determining a task's dispatch-ability.<br>
nice value range is -20 to +19 where -20 is highest, 0 default and +19 is lowest.
```bash
$ nice -5 wget https://wordpress.org/latest.zip # start download process with a nice value of 5.
$ sudo nice --5 wget https://wordpress.org/latest.zip # start download process with a nice value of (-5) (higher priority requires sudo privileges).

```

- **renice**: change the priority for a currently active process.
```bash
$ sudo renice -n nice_value  -p pid_of_the_process
$ ps -el | grep gnome-terminal
$ sudo renice -n 5 -p 8721 # adjust priority of a specific process by its id.
$ sudo renice -n 5 -g sales # adjust priority of athe sales group.
$ # OR you can use the 'r' command from the top utility to change niceness.
```

- **pgrep**: Search for a process ID.
``` bash
$ pgrep -l ps # List PID and its process name.
```

### 2. I/O Management:
- **Output Redirection**: 
```bash
$ ls > /dev/null # discard output.
$ ls > ./file1.txt # save the output to file1.txt
$ sort < file1.txt > sortedfile1.txt # sort file1.txt contetnts and save it in sortedfile1.txt
```

### 3. Search in Files:
- **wc**: count character words, lines in a file to compare different versions of a file.
```bash
$ wc file1 -w # count the number of words only.
```

- **diff**: Compare fiels line by line. here is [a great tutorial](https://linuxize.com/post/diff-command-in-linux/). 
```bash
$ diff file1.txt file2.txt
``` 

- **grep**: search for a pattern in a file or in an output of a code.
```bash
$ ls | grep file1.txt # highlights file1.txt if it is in the directory.
$ grep -r word # searches for this "word" in all of the files and subdirectory files.
$ grep -i word file1 # search for "word" in file1, (no case sensetive) WORD is good.
$ grep -v word file1 # Show all lines except the one containing "word"
```

- **tr**: translate or delete characters.
```bash
$ echo "hello, world!" | tr [a-z] [A-Z] # returns all CAPS.
$ echo "Hello, World!" | tr [:space:] '\t' # returns tabs instead of spaces.
```

- **cut**: Remove a section from every line of a specific file.
```bash
$ cut -f3 -d: /etc/passwd # shows the third column from every line of this file, (-d stands for delimiter, default = TAB).
$ cut -c1-4 /etc/paswwd # shows the first 4 characters of every line.
$ echo "Hello, World!" | cut -c1-5 > file1.txt # put Hello into file1.txt and save it.
```

- **sort**: sort lines of text files.
```bash 
$ sort –t : –o passwd_sorted /etc/passwd # sort the file into alphabetical order and save it into passwd_sorted, (-t select the delimiter)
```

## Day 5: Archiving
- **tar**: create an archive.
```bash
$ tar -cvf archivename.tar file1 file2 file3 # -c: create archive, -v: verbose (write files names), -f: specify the archive file.
$ tar -rvf archivename.tar file4 # add file4 to archive.
$ tar -uvf /root/homes.tar /home # -u: updates an archive, only newer files will be written to the archive.
$ tar -tvf /root/homes.tar # -t: List contents of archive.
$ tar -xvf /root/homes.tar -C /tmp # -C: To specify the target directory you want to extract the file to.
$ tar -zcvf archive.tar.gz file1 # create an archive and COMPRESS it.
```
- **compress**: compress a file.
```bash
$ gzip file1 # compress file1 into file1.gz
$ gzip file1.tar # compress the archive into file1.tar.gz
```

Commit message:

add extract, add sudo passwd root cmd

Linux/Admin 1/Readme.md, after:

# Commands I've Learnt:
**I will write the new commands for me because most of these commands I've studied from another sources.**
## Day 1: Basic Commands

- **ls**: List files and dir.
```bash
$ ls -R # list all files and Dirs and thier sub-directories RECURSIVELY.
```

- **head & tail**: Print the first and last lines of a file.
```bash
$ head -3 file1.txt # print the first 3 lines.
$ tail -2 file1.txt # print the last two lines.
```

- **cp**: Copy files and dir.
```bash
$ cp -i file1.txt dir1/file1.txt # asks before overwrite the file.
```

## Day 2: Users and Groups
### 1. Users:
- The **/etc/passwd** file includes these fields: <br>
Login name | Encrypted password | User Id (uid) | Group Id (gid) | Comment about the user | Home Directory | Login bash.

- `sudo passwd root` To set the root paswword for the first time (ubuntu image from amazon)

- The **/etc/shadow** file: Have all passwords encrypted -probably- with SHA 256 

- **useradd**: Add new users.
```bash
$ useradd username # add new user named username
$ useradd -u 1003 -g 1003 -c “this is a comment from this testuser” -md /home/testuser -s /bin/bash testuser # here we specify some details about the user.
```

- **userdel**: Delete a user account
```bash
$ userdel -rf testuser # delete testuser account and home directory and mail spool with force of removing files.
```

- **usermod**: Change all properties of a user like adding user to group, **BUT for changing password**, it's not good.
```bash
$ usermod -l test11@user testuser # this will change the username from testuser to test11@user.
$ usermod -L testuser # this will lock the account of testuser (can't login).
$ usermod -a -G newgroup testuser # this will add testuser to newgroup.
```

- **passwd**: Change a password for a user.
```bash
$ passwd testuser # it made you enter a new password
$ sudo passwd -d testuser # delete password of testuser account
```

- **chage**: Change password expiry information.
```bash
$ chage -m 20 testuser # Change the min number of days between password changes to 20 days.
$ chage -M 20 testuser # Change the max number of days between password changes to 20 days.
```

### 2. Groups:

- **groupadd**: Create new group
```bash
$ groupadd newgroup # adds nwegroup group :)
```

- **groupmod**: Modify group properties like name and ID.
```bash
$ groupmod -n new_group old_group # Renames the old_group TO new_group.
```

- **chown**: change group and/or user ownership of a file or directory.
```bash
$ chown :newgroup file1 # Change owenership of file1 from its old group TO newgroup.
$ chown -R user2:newgroup dir1 # Change dir1 owenership from its old group TO newgroup and from old user TO user2.
```

- **groupmems**: See which users are a member of a certin group.
```bash
$ groupmems -g group1 -l # List all users within group1.
```

- **poweroff**: Turns the machine off
```bash
$ poweroff
$ shutdown -h 18:20 # Schedule shutdown at 6:20 A.M. 
$ init 0
```


## Day 3: Vi Editor & Environment Variables:
### 1. Vi Editor:

- **view**: view a file in read-only mode:
```bash
$ view file1 # Opens file1 in read-only mode. Press :q to quit
```

- **:n**: goes to the nth row.
- **ctrl+f**: goes forward one page.
- **ctrl+b**: goes backward one page.<br><br>

- **yy then p**: copy and paste.
- **:n,n co n**: copy lines n though n and puts them after Line n.<br><br>


- **x**: delete one letter.
- **dd**: delete one line.
- **D**: delete one line from the cursor to the right end of the line.
- **:3,7d**: delete from line 3 to 7.<br><br>

- **/string**: Searches for this string in the file.
- **n**: When pressing n it searches for the next occurrence of the string.
- **N**: When pressing N it searches for the previous occurrence of the string.
- **:%s/old/new/g**: Searches for the old string and replaces it with the new string globally.
- **:set nu**: show lines numbers.

### 2. Environment Variables:
- **env**: it display all environment variables.
- **$PATH**: A colon-separated list of directories used by the shell to look for executable program names.
- **alias**: make your own commands shortcut.
```bash
$ alias list='ls -l' # this will make list same as ls -l command.
$ unalias list # it removes list command and you can use ls -l normally.
```

## Day 4: Processes, I/O Management, Search in Files:
### 1. Processes:

- **ps**: list running prcess in foreground.
```bash
$ ps -a # display all process attached to the terminal even with different tabs.
$ ps -f # display all information about process.
```

- **jobs**: list running jobs.
```bash
$ sleep 100 & # delay for 100 seconds and run it in the background.
$ jobs # list all jobs, Outputs [1]+ Running.
$ fg 1 # move job no.1 from background to foreground.
$ ctrl+z # stop the running command (sleep in the foreground).
$ bg 1 # move the running command (sleep) to the background again.

$ kill -19 %1 # SigStop sleep command.
$ kill %1 # SigTerm sleep command.
$ jobs # list that it's terminated and then it's gone.
```

- **nice**: start a process with adjusted priority.
A negative nice value means higher priority, whereas a positive nice value means lower priority.<br>
Zero in this field simply means priority will not be adjusted in determining a task's dispatch-ability.<br>
nice value range is -20 to +19 where -20 is highest, 0 default and +19 is lowest.
```bash
$ nice -5 wget https://wordpress.org/latest.zip # start download process with a nice value of 5.
$ sudo nice --5 wget https://wordpress.org/latest.zip # start download process with a nice value of (-5) (higher priority requires sudo privileges).

```

- **renice**: change the priority for a currently active process.
```bash
$ sudo renice -n nice_value  -p pid_of_the_process
$ ps -el | grep gnome-terminal
$ sudo renice -n 5 -p 8721 # adjust priority of a specific process by its id.
$ sudo renice -n 5 -g sales # adjust priority of athe sales group.
$ # OR you can use the 'r' command from the top utility to change niceness.
```

- **pgrep**: Search for a process ID.
``` bash
$ pgrep -l ps # List PID and its process name.
```

### 2. I/O Management:
- **Output Redirection**: 
```bash
$ ls > /dev/null # discard output.
$ ls > ./file1.txt # save the output to file1.txt
$ sort < file1.txt > sortedfile1.txt # sort file1.txt contetnts and save it in sortedfile1.txt
```

### 3. Search in Files:
- **wc**: count character words, lines in a file to compare different versions of a file.
```bash
$ wc file1 -w # count the number of words only.
```

- **diff**: Compare fiels line by line. here is [a great tutorial](https://linuxize.com/post/diff-command-in-linux/). 
```bash
$ diff file1.txt file2.txt
``` 

- **grep**: search for a pattern in a file or in an output of a code.
```bash
$ ls | grep file1.txt # highlights file1.txt if it is in the directory.
$ grep -r word # searches for this "word" in all of the files and subdirectory files.
$ grep -i word file1 # search for "word" in file1, (no case sensetive) WORD is good.
$ grep -v word file1 # Show all lines except the one containing "word"
```

- **tr**: translate or delete characters.
```bash
$ echo "hello, world!" | tr [a-z] [A-Z] # returns all CAPS.
$ echo "Hello, World!" | tr [:space:] '\t' # returns tabs instead of spaces.
```

- **cut**: Remove a section from every line of a specific file.
```bash
$ cut -f3 -d: /etc/passwd # shows the third column from every line of this file, (-d stands for delimiter, default = TAB).
$ cut -c1-4 /etc/paswwd # shows the first 4 characters of every line.
$ echo "Hello, World!" | cut -c1-5 > file1.txt # put Hello into file1.txt and save it.
```

- **sort**: sort lines of text files.
```bash 
$ sort –t : –o passwd_sorted /etc/passwd # sort the file into alphabetical order and save it into passwd_sorted, (-t select the delimiter)
```

## Day 5: Archiving
- **tar**: create an archive.
```bash
$ tar -cvf archivename.tar file1 file2 file3 # -c: create archive, -v: verbose (write files names), -f: specify the archive file.
$ tar -rvf archivename.tar file4 # add file4 to archive.
$ tar -uvf /root/homes.tar /home # -u: updates an archive, only newer files will be written to the archive.
$ tar -tvf /root/homes.tar # -t: List contents of archive.
$ tar -xvf /root/homes.tar -C /tmp # -x: to EXTRACT files -C: To specify the target directory you want to extract the file to.
$ tar -zcvf archive.tar.gz file1 # create an archive and COMPRESS it.
```
- **compress**: compress a file.
```bash
$ gzip file1 # compress file1 into file1.gz
$ gzip file1.tar # compress the archive into file1.tar.gz
```
