Git & GitHub/README.md, before:

# Git & Github Resources

- I've used <a href="https://www.coursera.org/learn/introduction-git-github">"Introduction to Git and GitHub Course"</a> from Google on Coursera platform.<br> And I got <a href="https://www.coursera.org/account/accomplishments/certificate/LGFNC84W2EEL">a certificate</a> of completion.

- I've used this [**youtube tutorial**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8JJ101D3knE) to refresh my git basic commands.

- I've used [**this video**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXGug4itlTk) to know more about git stash command.

#### I'm regularly using these websites for some syntax help.

1. [GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/importing-your-projects-to-github/importing-source-code-to-github/adding-locally-hosted-code-to-github)
2. [git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf](https://github.com/AbdassalamAhmad/DevOps_Learning_Journey/blob/main/Git%20%26%20GitHub/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf) (important!)

## Commands I've Learnt

**config commands:**
```bash
$ git config --global user.name "user name"
$ git config --global user.email "email@company.com"
$ git config --global core.editor "code --wait" # make vscode default editor for git. (--wait to make the terminal wait untill we finished editing)
$ git config --global core.autocrlf true # to make end of the line the same on windows and macos.
# so that git doesn't make mistakes between end of lines on windwos (CR LF) and on mac (LF).
```
### Creating a Local Repository and Adding it to GitHub using Git.
**git init:** initialize a new repo even on non-empty directory.
```bash
$ git init -b main # initialize a new git repo locally with branch named "main" NOT "master" (because git moved away from master naming terminology).
$ git add . # Adds all files in the local repository and stages them for commit.
$ git stage . # SAME AS `git add .`
$ git commit -m "First Commit" # Commits the tracked changes and prepares them to be pushed to a remote repository.
$ git ls-files # shows the files in staging area.
$ git rm file3.txt # remove file3 from local dir and staging area (just commit and you'll be done.)
$ git rm -r --cached dir # remove dir from staging area (incase of adding it to gitignore after staging the file)


# REMOTE PART.
## Here we should create a repo on github and then we will link it with local git repo then pushing the code.
$ git remote add origin  <REMOTE_URL> # we get REMOTE_URL from github repo.
$ git remote -v # Verifies the new remote URL.
$ git remote set-url origin <new_REMOTE_URL> # If you change repo use this command to update origin link.
```

**history commands:**
```bash
$ git log # Shows all commits. press `space` to go to next page, press `q` to quit.
$ git log --graph --oneline # shows nice graph of our commits (useful when branching).
$ git log --graph --oneline --all # shows all branches commits in a nice graph.
$ git log origin/main -p -1 # to see the new commits made on remote. and to see what has been modified in the last commit (-1).


$ git show 6d52 # shows commit details and diff commands.
$ git show HEAD~2 # shows the commit before head with two steps.
```

**undoing commands:**
```bash
$ git restore --staged . # restore all files in staging area (un-add so changes stay in working dir).
$ git restore file1.txt # (get back to previous version that was stored in staging area).
$ git restore --source=HEAD~1 file1.txt #

$ git revert HEAD # roll back one commit in time.
$ git revert <commit_ID> # rollback to commit id.
```

**branching & merging commands:**
```bash
$ git branch # list all branches.
$ git branch new # create branch named new.
$ git branch -r # to show remote branches.
$ git branch -d new # delete 'new' branch
$ git checkout -b new # create branch named new and move HEAD to it.

$ git merge <branchname> # merge branchname into main (HEAD was on main) (opposite of rebasing)
$ git log --graph --oneline # shows nice graph of our commits (useful when branching).
```

**fetch & pull commands:**
```bash
$ git fetch # download changes made in remote repo only (Don't merge).
$ git log origin/main -p -1 # to see the new commits made on remote. and to see what has been modified in the last commit (-1).
$ git merge origin/main # to merge remote to my local main branch.

$ git pull origin main # download and merge changes from remote into local repo.
```

**push command:**
```bash
$ git push origin main # push local changes to remote repo.
$ git pull origin main # when someone made change to remote before we push our changes.
```

**rebase command:**
```bash
$ git rebase <newbranch> # make this newbranch the new base (take all changes from main branch and put them over newbranch branch).

$ git add . # to add changes we made after fixing the conflict.
$ git rebase --continue # when a conflict happen and we fix it, then we use this command to complete the rebasing.

$ git rebase -i # when you want to squash commits use this command (-i interactively).
$ git push -f # if you want to update the history of a remote repo you should force the update (usually on pull requests to squash commits into one.)
```

**stash commands**:
```bash
$ git stash # hide all of your work, so that you can do checkout to other branch and complete your work.
$ git stash list # shows all stashes 
$ git stash show "stash@{0}" # show the lastest stash i made. use "" to avoid shell escaping curly brackets.
$ git stash apply # apply last stash made, without removing it from stash list.
$ git  stash pop # apply last stash, and delete it from stash list.
```

Commit message:

add reset command that delete commits

Git & GitHub/README.md, after:

# Git & Github Resources

- I've used <a href="https://www.coursera.org/learn/introduction-git-github">"Introduction to Git and GitHub Course"</a> from Google on Coursera platform.<br> And I got <a href="https://www.coursera.org/account/accomplishments/certificate/LGFNC84W2EEL">a certificate</a> of completion.

- I've used this [**youtube tutorial**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8JJ101D3knE) to refresh my git basic commands.

- I've used [**this video**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXGug4itlTk) to know more about git stash command.

#### I'm regularly using these websites for some syntax help.

1. [GitHub Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/importing-your-projects-to-github/importing-source-code-to-github/adding-locally-hosted-code-to-github)
2. [git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf](https://github.com/AbdassalamAhmad/DevOps_Learning_Journey/blob/main/Git%20%26%20GitHub/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf) (important!)

## Commands I've Learnt

**config commands:**
```bash
$ git config --global user.name "user name"
$ git config --global user.email "email@company.com"
$ git config --global core.editor "code --wait" # make vscode default editor for git. (--wait to make the terminal wait untill we finished editing)
$ git config --global core.autocrlf true # to make end of the line the same on windows and macos.
# so that git doesn't make mistakes between end of lines on windwos (CR LF) and on mac (LF).
```
### Creating a Local Repository and Adding it to GitHub using Git.
**git init:** initialize a new repo even on non-empty directory.
```bash
$ git init -b main # initialize a new git repo locally with branch named "main" NOT "master" (because git moved away from master naming terminology).
$ git add . # Adds all files in the local repository and stages them for commit.
$ git stage . # SAME AS `git add .`
$ git commit -m "First Commit" # Commits the tracked changes and prepares them to be pushed to a remote repository.
$ git ls-files # shows the files in staging area.
$ git rm file3.txt # remove file3 from local dir and staging area (just commit and you'll be done.)
$ git rm -r --cached dir # remove dir from staging area (incase of adding it to gitignore after staging the file)


# REMOTE PART.
## Here we should create a repo on github and then we will link it with local git repo then pushing the code.
$ git remote add origin  <REMOTE_URL> # we get REMOTE_URL from github repo.
$ git remote -v # Verifies the new remote URL.
$ git remote set-url origin <new_REMOTE_URL> # If you change repo use this command to update origin link.
```

**history commands:**
```bash
$ git log # Shows all commits. press `space` to go to next page, press `q` to quit.
$ git log --graph --oneline # shows nice graph of our commits (useful when branching).
$ git log --graph --oneline --all # shows all branches commits in a nice graph.
$ git log origin/main -p -1 # to see the new commits made on remote. and to see what has been modified in the last commit (-1).


$ git show 6d52 # shows commit details and diff commands.
$ git show HEAD~2 # shows the commit before head with two steps.
```

**undoing commands:**
```bash
$ git reset <commit-id> # will go back to that commit and DELETE everything after it (history and files).


$ git restore --staged . # restore all files in staging area (un-add so changes stay in working dir).
$ git restore file1.txt # (get back to previous version that was stored in staging area).
$ git restore --source=HEAD~1 file1.txt #

$ git revert HEAD # roll back one commit in time.
$ git revert <commit_ID> # rollback to commit id.
```

**branching & merging commands:**
```bash
$ git branch # list all branches.
$ git branch new # create branch named new.
$ git branch -r # to show remote branches.
$ git branch -d new # delete 'new' branch
$ git checkout -b new # create branch named new and move HEAD to it.

$ git merge <branchname> # merge branchname into main (HEAD was on main) (opposite of rebasing)
$ git log --graph --oneline # shows nice graph of our commits (useful when branching).
```

**fetch & pull commands:**
```bash
$ git fetch # download changes made in remote repo only (Don't merge).
$ git log origin/main -p -1 # to see the new commits made on remote. and to see what has been modified in the last commit (-1).
$ git merge origin/main # to merge remote to my local main branch.

$ git pull origin main # download and merge changes from remote into local repo.
```

**push command:**
```bash
$ git push origin main # push local changes to remote repo.
$ git pull origin main # when someone made change to remote before we push our changes.
```

**rebase command:**
```bash
$ git rebase <newbranch> # make this newbranch the new base (take all changes from main branch and put them over newbranch branch).

$ git add . # to add changes we made after fixing the conflict.
$ git rebase --continue # when a conflict happen and we fix it, then we use this command to complete the rebasing.

$ git rebase -i # when you want to squash commits use this command (-i interactively).
$ git push -f # if you want to update the history of a remote repo you should force the update (usually on pull requests to squash commits into one.)
```

**stash commands**:
```bash
$ git stash # hide all of your work, so that you can do checkout to other branch and complete your work.
$ git stash list # shows all stashes 
$ git stash show "stash@{0}" # show the lastest stash i made. use "" to avoid shell escaping curly brackets.
$ git stash apply # apply last stash made, without removing it from stash list.
$ git  stash pop # apply last stash, and delete it from stash list.
```
